# C++ Map: Accessing an Element
## Or, Layers on Layers on Layers

{# TODO #}
{# Fix header sizes #}
{# Fix code sizes #}
{# Wrap codeblocks to 80chrs #}
{# Add background to codeblocks #}
{# Add syntax highlighting to codeblocks (maybe) #}


This post isn't meant to be a put down of C++ (I'm not nearly good enough to
justify doing that).
Part of what makes languages so fun to learn are the small ways
they get you to rethink how to conceptualise or implement a concept. This post
provides an example in a place I didn't expect to find one.

## The Problem

From [exercism.io's 'nucleotide-count' problem](https://exercism.io/tracks/cpp/exercises/nucleotide-count)
> Given a string of DNA (ie containing only the characters `ACGT`) count the
frequencies of each 'nucleotide' (a character in the string).

Our interface looks like this:
```
class Counter
{
    std::map<char, int> ntc;
public:
    Counter(std::string nt);
    int count(char c) const;
    std::map<char, int> nucleotideCounts() const;
}
```
We populate the map of nucleotide frequencies `ntc` when an object is
initialised, and just implement interfaces for retrieving values from the map.
The `count` function returns the frequency for a given nucleotide, and
`nucleotideCounts` returns all frequencies as a map.

As an aside, notice the `const` declaration after the methods. Coming from C,
this was a bit non-intuitive, but there are some more uses for `const` in C++.
(There's a good overview [here](http://duramecho.com/ComputerInformation/WhyHowCppConst.html)).
In our case, it's necessary because we want to tell the C++ compiler that we
aren't going to make changes to member variables: we are just going to access
and then return values. The tests that exercism provides with this problem
won't compile unless this declaration is made, and it's relevant to discovering
the nature of C++'s map.

Finally, we get around to implementing methods. My initial implementation
looked something like this:
```
{% raw %}
Counter::Counter(string dna_string)
{
    ntc = {{'A', 0}, {'C', 0}, {'G', 0}, {'T', 0}};
    for (char c : dna_string)
    {
        ntc[c]++;
    }
}

map<char, int> Counter::nucleotideCounts() const
{
    return ntc;
}

int Counter::count(char c) const
{
    return ntc[c];
}
{% endraw %}
```
We don't check for malformed DNA strings yet, so this should fail at least some
of the tests provided, but there's a bigger problem with the above code: it
doesn't compile.
```
nucleotide_count.cpp: In member function ‘int Counter::count(char) const’:
nucleotide_count.cpp:16:17: error: passing ‘const std::map<char, int>’ as ‘this’ argument discards qualifiers [-fpermissive]
   16 |     return ntc[c];
      |                 ^
```
You'll recall that we declared the method as being const, promising not to
change any inputs to the method. All we're doing is accessing an element of the
map, so why would the compiler complain that we're violating this promise?

Our constructor provides the last clue we need to pinpoint the problem. When
given a key not currently in the map, it doesn't throw any errors, despite (in
theory) performing addition with an object that doesn't exist. In fact, it
works as if the value of any new key was already initialed to 0:
```
{% raw %}
void main()
{
    const Counter c = Counter("BAR");
    map<char, int> m = c.nucleotideCounts();
    // m = {{'A': 1}, {'B': 1}, {'C': 0}, {'G': 0}, {'R': 1}, {'T': 0}}
}
{% endraw %}
```
At this point, there's not much left to do but RTFM.

## The C++ `map` Class
### map::operator[]

For some key k, if k exists the \[\] operator returns a reference to the value at
that key.

If k does not exist, then a new value is inserted and intialised at k. This is
why our code breaks, and why our seemingly undefined ints have values of 0.

So, how can we ensure our program does not attempt to change the map when we
access an element?

### map::find

### map::at

## Why?

I suppose the fact that this behaviour took me by suprise is worth considering
as well. Having come from other languages that implement dictionaries in the
standard library or builtins, why is this the first time I have encountered
this behaviour? Why would the most basic way of accessing elements in a map be
implemented like this in C++?

My best guess is that it has something to do with assigning values to new keys.
Pour moi, the intuitive way to do this would be `m[k] = v`. This is how other
languages insert new keys into maps or dictionaries, however these languages
have something that C++ does not seem to have: a method of differentiating
between assignment and access.
