# Studying
## Notes on University Study

### Why?

Some folks have asked me about how I study.

Most of the good studying habits I have developed have matured out of an
extremely fortunate post-16 school experience, and a summer-long sprint through
a semester's worth of MIT OpenCourseWare material.

The structure of study is given by a wonderful guide for Undergraduate Math
Courses available [here](https://web.stanford.edu/class/math41/jasp.html). This
is generalised and extended mostly with the book 'A Mind for Numbers' by
Barbara Oakley.

A Mind for Numbers is the single best informational resource on
the topic of learning well. It touts itself as for maths and science students
but its knowledge is universal, and gives a blitz introduction to the relevant
neuroscience and information theory through active practise on the book's own
material, which is obvious and genius.

Knowing things is fine and all, but the actual most important element of good,
consistent study - mental and physical wellness, the ability to 'preserve
oneself' - was something that I only really consolidated by the end of my 3
years at university. The best resource and driver of this I have is my friends
and family, followed by 'Complete Calisthenics' by Ashley Kalym.

### Key Concepts

Some of you will look at the plan below and think, "that is absolutely
overkill". Depending on the course, you're absolutely correct. After returning
to my actual university course after a stint doing an MIT workload, the amount
of work required was as much as an order of magnitude less than what is
described below. That said, it was only just enough to keep up over a few MIT
modules, so it is a system I am glad to have in full. In this light, I've put
what I believe are the most important ideas here.

Identify important information - This may seem obvious and vague, but is
seriously lacking among many students, in part because of the presentation of
material in lectures and coursebooks. Become briefly familiar with a few
fundamental ideas before a lecture - glance through your textbook for 5 to 10
minutes and get a grasp on ideas in subheadings and bold text. In all
likelihood a majority of your capability in the subject is tied up in being
able to apply the concepts that pop out at you from this process.

This applies in general too - you will be taught things that are next to
useless. Things that you may even be graded on, but are boring and stupid.
Remember them, and don't spend a moment more of your energy than you have to
in order to learn them. Becoming capable at identifying their importance
upfront frees up a lot of energy over time.

Actively Engage - There is no such thing as passive learning. TODO expand

We Fall to Our Habits - 90% of the pain students undergo comes from
inefficient balancing of workload. All of the complaining about difficult
assignments begins the week before it is due. The most disappointed students
after an exam were the ones that should have aced it, but never did short and
regular study. When you really get into the groove of work it doesn't really
have any mental overhead, but cramming is literally self-torture.

### Study Plan

BEFORE a Lecture - skim relevant section in text book.

This orients your perspective even if your understanding is cursory, as you
begin to identify the things that are most important to understand. Look for
phrases in headings, images, bold text, and words and notation that keeps
popping up. Recommended to do before a lecture so that you have enough time to
look up anything that looks like the textbook takes for granted. This seriously
reduces the number of lectures that are too fast or totally baffling.

DURING a lecture - take notes as if for a friend, and ask questions.

Notes aren't written for yourself, but for your future self, who *may not know
as much as you do*! When you write as though a friend who didn't take the
lecture should be able to know what the core ideas were, you structure better
and consider what needs to be included for a more complete understanding. By
the way, don't underestimate the power of a well structured first draft - part
of the remembering process is not just of what was written, but where and how
it was written, literally how it is laid out on the page is tied to your memory
of the concept. This is a hook to improve your knowledge.

"Asking questions" I'm not going to spend much time on, but if you know what you
need to ask then ask it as soon as you can, you only get so much in person
contact time. The fact that you can ask academics questions and expect replies
is what almost all of your degree expenses are going towards, and is the most
valuable asset you can leverage.

JUST AFTER a lecture - review notes and compare.

Skim your notes shortly to consider how the ideas in the lecture relate to one
another - do ideas from the end of the lecture give context to ideas from the
start of the lecture? Here you are knitting together the whole thing to get a
better idea of the big picture. Then discuss the ideas with other students and
consider their notes - this fills in gaps you may not have realised existed.

SAME DAY AS lecture - edit and summarise notes.

Think of this as the draft copy of the text vs. the edited copy. Your goal,
which is totally arbritrary, should be to try and fit all the major concepts of
the lecture into no more than 1/2 a page of A4 paper, through any means you can
think of. At this time you also would like to relate them to other ideas you
have learnt so far, so this exercise seriously forces you to engage with the
absolutely most essential elements. Something I often hear during written
assignments with word limits is that students just "can't make it any shorter".
Invariably this has been false, but it does point out that this is a skill that
requires practice. Abstraction is a delicate balance of complexity, after all.

BEFORE NEXT lecture - do practical hands on learning.

This is the part that actually matters.
Repeat after me - there is no such thing as passive learning. And there is also
no point to simply "knowing things". If you are not using ideas to make cool
things and solve cool problems, they are probably not particularly useful
ideas, or you do not know them well enough.

SAME WEEK AS lecture - turn notes into flashcards.

It wouldn't be a post on studying without mentioning spaced repitition. Love it
or hate it, spaced repition is the best method for keeping knowledge permanent.
Some specific tips on what to include in your flashcards: don't flashcard
everything. We want to spend most of our time outside of lectures actually
doing interesting things, and flashcarding everything is a quick way to make
studying tedious. Additionally, focus on things that would otherwise require
brute memorisation, or hard problems that you want to go through several times.

### Mental Fitness

Like physical activity, a high degree of mental activity is something that
strains the mind and has a number of risks associated with it. In "modernity",
folks make it particularly tough on themselves by regularly performing a number
of activities that are akin to tying a weight vest to the brain, causing them
to become injured even under non-strenuous mental loads, or to shy from
becoming mentally active at all except in a token sense, ultimately becoming
"obese of mind".

TODO fin.

Physical Fitness & Dietary Nutrition

"Mental Nutrition"

Rest
