# Simple C Obfuscation

## Introduction

Recently I've taken an interest in the magnificent and marvelously mystifying
wonders of the [International Obfuscated C Code Contest](https://ioccc.org).

One entry, anderson 2000, caught my eye. The hint file mentions that hand
deobfuscation is the best way to understand how the program, and the program
seemed simple enough in function that I might be able to do it, so I did.

This post will detail some techniques you can use to make C programs harder to
understand, as learnt from anderson.c.

To help demonstrate, here is a sample program for your viewing pleasure:

```c
unsigned char sum(unsigned char a, unsigned char b)
{
    if (UCHAR_MAX - a < b)
    {
        return 0;
    }
    else
    {
        return a + b;
    }
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (b < 3) { return 1; }
    unsigned char a = strtoul(m[1], NULL, 10);
    unsigned char b = strtoul(m[2], NULL, 10);
    printf("Sum: %i\n", sum(a, b));
}
```

This program is simple enough. We take 2 unsigned chars as
arguments and print their sum. If their sum would wrap around to 0, we print
their sum as 0. The only reason these are chars rather than, say, ints, is
only so it's easier to hit the max. Let's make it ugly.

## Globals

Globals are bad practice for a reason. It's trivial to make spaghetti code
where variables change inside a function, changing the environment of the
caller without any outside indication. Better yet, if these globals are used
within other functions, a spaghetti spiderweb is quickly woven
across your program.

Of course, since we're obfuscating our code, none of our variable names have
any indication of how they should be used. So, why should we only use them for
one thing? When we're finished using `char a` in `void t()` as a temporary
variable to swap characters, why not use it in `void p()` to index an
array, or to hold a bitmask? Combine this with other variables state being very
important in later functions to ensure your reader cannot simply write off
changes across functions.

Anderson's entry also takes the approach of having every variable be not just
global, but a char or pointer to/array of chars. This means that any context
the reader may have gleaned from the type is also removed.

### Example 1

```c
unsigned char a[2], c; char **x;

void f(void)
{
    // C still has 255 from decrementing in p() - we can use that here!
    if (c - *a < *(a+1))
    {
        ++c;
    }
    else
    {
        c = *a + *(a+1);
    }
}

void g(void)
{
    printf("Sum: %i\n", c);
}

void p(void)
{
    // Split into own function to make logic less obvious in main()
    a[c] = strtoul(x[c+1], NULL, 10);
}

void n(void)
{
    while (c--) { p(); };
}

int main(int b, char *m[])
{
    if (b < 3) { return 1; }
    x = m;
    c = 2;

    n(); f(); g();
}
```

This is better, but still fairly readable. While it is difficult to figure out
the function of the entire program from any specific function, its still not
hard to grok the functions and how they interact with each other. f() is
especially readable - its function is pretty obvious, and it tells a reader a lot
about how the variables are used.

## Short-Circuit Evaluation

C evaluates logical operators from left to right. For some operators, it can
discern
what the result will be without having to evaluate all the expressions that
operator's output depends on. For example, C knows that `0 && x()` will always be
0, no matter what the value of x is. C will 'short-circuit' the evaluation of
the operator, not bothering to evaluate the right hand side, in this example
meaning x will not be called.

What does this have to do with obfuscation? It allows you to save space and
decrease readability by replacing your if statements with `&&` and `||`. Not
only this, but when combined with other operators to make more complex
statements, you can add a few extra seconds of latency to a reader's
understanding of the code.

### Example 2

```c
unsigned char a[2], c; char **x;

void f(void)
{
    c += c - *a < *(a+1) || (c = *a - 1 + *(a+1));
}

/*
void g(void)
{
    printf("Sum: %i\n", c);
}

void p(void)
{
    a[c] = strtoul(x[c+1], NULL, 10);
}

void n(void)
{
    while (c--) { p(); };
}
*/

int main(int b, char *m[])
{
    b > 2 && (x = m), (c = 2), n(), f(), g(), 1;
}
```

One downside to using this approach is that these operators cannot involve
functions that return void, though as we'll see in a moment this can be worked
around and even used to our advantage.

## Return types without returns

In C, you can write a function returning a type without writing any return
expressions in its implementation, and it will be treated as
if we wrote `return;` at the end of the definition. Using the return value is
unidentified behaviour, but for our purposes we don't particularly care - we
just want to tell the compiler our function can be used in expressions where it
expects a return value. We don't want to use this value purposefully (it's
undefined behaviour to do so) but it fits nicely into the short-circuit
evaluation discussed above. Additionally, although warnings will be given in
C99+, if we give no return type then it will infer it to return int, so we give
our reader even less information. You could also give any other return type,
for the purposes of misleading your reader.

TODO, rewrite this, copied from below
```c
unsigned char a[2], c; char **x;

f(void)
{
    c += c - *a < *(a+1) || (c = *a - 1 + *(a+1));
}

g(void)
{
    printf("Sum: %i\n", c);
}

p(void)
{
    a[c] = strtoul(x[c+1], NULL, 10);
}

n(void)
{
    c-- && n(p());
}

int main(int b, char *m[])
{
    b > 2 && f(n(x = m), c = 2), g();
}
```

## K&R-Style Function Declarations

If you know why we've written the functions that take no parameters as taking
void, you know where we're going next. Function declarations suffer from 2
problems - initialiser lists and implicit return types. In this way, we can
write a function without giving our reader or the compiler any information
about how the function will be used.



- Can write functions without declaring return type or input parameters
- Reduces context in reading function declaration
- These functions can still be given input params (which are evaluated first)

### Example 4

```c
unsigned char a[2], c; char **x;

f()
{
    c += c - *a < *(a+1) || (c = *a - 1 + *(a+1));
}

g()
{
    printf("Sum: %i\n", c);
}

p()
{
    a[c] = strtoul(x[c+1], NULL, 10);
}

n()
{
    c-- && n(p());
}

int main(int b, char *m[])
{
    b > 2 && f(n(x = m), c = 2), g();
}
```

## Wrong-side Indexing int\[\*int\]
- Quirk of C replacing indexing with \*(a+b)
- Still complains for exactly this problem if index is not a pointer though...

### Example 5

```c
unsigned char a[2], c; char **x;

f()
{
    c += c - *a < (*x++[0] = 1)[a] || (c = *a - 1 + *(a+1));
}

g()
{
    printf("Sum: %i\n", c);
}

p()
{
    c[a] = strtoul(*(1+c+x), NULL, 10);
}

n()
{
    c-- && n(p());
}

int main(int b, char *m[])
{
    b > 2 && f(n(x = m), c = 2), g();
}
```

## Interlude: ASCII Art

The following improvements I'm going to suggest aren't too applicable to our
program, so lets take this time to make our program look pretty. I don't know
how the pros tend to do this, but since I suck at art I like to split my
program into roughly equal blocks, which you can generally increase and
decrease in length by adding spaces and semicolons where appropriate.

Here I've made the program into a cross, to "cleverly" constrast the program's
function, which is to sum. Get it?

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>


unsigned                   char a[2]
  ,c; char               **x;f(){c
    +=c-*a<(           *x++[0]=1
      )[a]||(c       =*a-1+*(a
        +1));}g(   ){printf(
         "Sum: %i\n",c);}p
         (){c[a] = strtoul
        (*(1+c+x   ),NULL,10
      );}n(){c       --&&n(p()
    );}; int           main( int
  b,char*m               []){b>2&&
f(n(x=m),                  c=2),g();}
```

## A String.

- A long string of very specific, seemingly random values, especially chars, is
really painful
- Encode all kinds of constants in it to be accessed using operations

### Example 6

Link to commit on semaphores repo, pre-dealing with T string, and challenge
reader to deobfuscate.

## How could it be worse?
- anderson.c follows some good style
- Each function does some specific thing
- And each function calls the others in an understandable way (the function to
print all the ascii figures calls the function to print a row of characters
which calls the function to print a row for a figure)
- No reason this should necessarily be the case
- Macro obfuscation is also not touched, not always trivial to replace.
